# Customer Segmentation & E-commerce Analytics Website

## Overview

This is a customer segmentation project. The system analyzes a retail dataset to group customers into distinct segments based on their behavior, predict potential purchase price capacity, and offer personalized product recommendations.

The core functionalities are delivered through an interactive web interface where users can input a customer ID to generate a complete profile, including behavioral insights and tailored suggestions.

## Data set

```https://www.kaggle.com/code/bipinneupane1/retail-spending-pattern-analysis/input?select=retail_data.csv```
Note- i don't own this dataset and all it's user rights are based on kaggle and the owners discretion

## Core Features

  * **Customer Segmentation:** Utilizes the **KMeans clustering** algorithm to identify distinct customer groups based on demographics and purchasing patterns. This allows for targeted marketing and personalized experiences.

  * **Content-Based Product Recommendations:** Uses **Cosine Similarity** to find and recommend products that are similar to items a customer has previously purchased, enhancing user engagement and cross-selling opportunities.

  * **Price Prediction Model:** A powerful **XGBoost Regressor** model predicts the 'Total Amount' a customer is likely to spend on a transaction, based on their profile and product attributes.


-----

## Input used
Different models use different set of input data to predicted and are written below -

* **Clustering (KMeans)**

['Age', 'Total_Purchases', 'Amount', 'Total_Amount', 'Ratings', 'Month', 'Gender', 'Income', 'Customer_Segment', 'Product_Category', 'Product_Brand', 'Product_Type', 'Feedback', 'Shipping_Method', 'Payment_Method', 'Order_Status']

* **Product suggestion (Content based filtering - cosine similarity)**

['Gender', 'Income', 'Month', 'Customer_Segment', 'Product_Category', 'Product_Brand', 'Product_Type', 'Feedback', 'Shipping_Method', 'Payment_Method', 'Order_Status']

* **Price prediction (XGBoost Regressor)**

['Country', 'Age', 'Gender', 'Income', 'Month_Num', 'Customer_Segment', 'Product_Category', 'Product_Brand', 'Product_Type', 'Payment_Method', 'Shipping_Method']

## Models & Technologies Used

This project is built using a stack of powerful data science and machine learning technologies:

  * **Primary Language:** **Python**
  * **Core Libraries:**
      * `Pandas` & `NumPy` for data manipulation and numerical operations.
      * `Scikit-learn` for data preprocessing, clustering (KMeans), and building the product suggestion ( Cosine Similarity).
      * `XGBoost` for implementing the high-performance gradient boosting regression model.
      * `Matplotlib` & `Seaborn` for data visualization and exploratory data analysis.
      * `Pickle` for saving and loading the trained models.
      * `Flask` for creating the web server

-----

## Setup

To get the project running locally, follow these steps:

First make sure that **Git** is installed

1.  **Clone the Repository**

    ```
    git clone https://github.com/ATHUL-K-A/customer-segmentation.git
    cd customer-segmentation
    ```

2.  **Install Dependencies**
    Ensure you have Python installed. Then, install the required libraries from the `requirements.txt` file.

    open terminal in the folder with **requirements.txt**

    ```
    pip install -r requirements.txt
    ```
    if not working-
    ```
    python -m pip -r requirements.txt
    ```
-----

##  How to Run the Website

go to ur root folder (eg-)
1.  **Place Model Files:**
    Make sure all the `.pkl` files generated by the notebook are in the models folder:

        xgb_model.pkl
        kmeans_model.pkl
        pca_cluster.pkl
        scaler.pkl
        content_encoder.pkl
        product_features.pkl
        product_data.pkl
        feature_columns.pkl

2.  **Launch the website backend:**
        In ur project root folder (eg: D:\customer-segmentation), open terminal and run ```python app.py```

3.  **Using the Interface:**

      * Open your web browser and navigate to the local URL provided (e.g:- ```http://127.0.0.1:5000/```)
      * Fill in the values and click get prediction

-----



